Introduction
============

I'll start with an introduction of my general ambition with this
document, which is quite simply to record a personal summary and
reflection for each of the books I've read or listened to. I have some
catching up to do, and I'll start with outlining A. Why I'm doing this,
and B. Which books I still have to do this for. Then I'll start with at
least 2 of the books within this same paper before creating a structure,
because I know from myself that I can get quite distracted/ dwell away
from the main point if I do that first.

Reasons
-------

This has been a thought in the back of my mind for a while, and it
actually came up quite recently when I was having a discussion with
Timotheos, a guest lecturer for the Growth: Managing Your Firm course.
We were talking about some of the books we had read and I mentioned how
it could get quite mixed up. Then he started talking about how he had a
document which collected the books he had read (or at least a subset of
them) with summaries and reflections. I agreed that it would be quite a
useful thing, and he expounded with another reason: even if you stop
with it, a few years later you may reread one of the books and close it
with a different viewpoint, which you can then further reflect on. He
also mentioned that the document he uses is not intended for
modification, only being open for extension. In general, I can tell for
myself that the books I've read that I find useful get clearer in my
memory when I focus on my specific memories of reading them, and that I
actually feel excited for doing this kind of summary, so hopefully we'll
have some fun doing this. I find that the more I write the more I am
excited to write more, so let's continue!

List of books
=============

It is hard to decide which books to do first, but I actually think I
will treat it as a stack $->$ Last In First Out, as that way I can
discuss the things that are most recent to me and best in my memory
first. First a list of books that I am currently reading or want to read
because they keep popping up in my head:

Reading list
------------

-   12 Rules for Life (Jordan B. Peterson) - Quite the interesting guy
    talking about rules you can and should apply to your life

-   Predictable Irrational (Dr. Dan Aley) - Outlining some very
    interesting things in which humans are ever so irrational.

-   Thinking, Fast and Slow (Daniel Kahlemann) - Separates the mind into
    two parts, a fast intuitive mind and a slow rational one, and shows
    some very interesting aspects on the difference.

-   The Great Ideas of Psychology (Daniel N. Robinsson) \[ON HOLD\] - A
    summary of psychology from its very roots to its current state.

Wish list
---------

-   Black Swan, the impact of the highly improbable (\...)
    \[UNSTARTED\] - \...

-   Zero to One - Dad really recommends this one

-   50 lessons I learned from the world (Vic Johnson) - Interesting
    title and dad finished it

-   De meeste mensen deugen - Dad basically really admires the book

-   Homo Deus - All the other books of Harari have been great

-   Awaken the Giant within \| Giant Steps (Tony Robbins) - Want to read
    and do this one during a vactation or when I have a span of free
    time large enough.

-   Nudge - Seems like a good book, was quite recommended

-   Find out anything from anyone \...

### Considering

A list of books I'm considering, starting with the books recommended by
Nadav (from Growth - Managing Your Firm)

-   At the mind's limits (Jean Amery)

-   Man's search for meaning (Viktor Frankl)

-   Fear of freedom (Erich Fromm)

-   In the realm of hungry ghosts (Gabor Mate)

-   The abolition of man (CS Lewis)

-   I and Thou (Martin Buber)

-   Sovereignty of goodness (Iris Murdoch)

-   The malaise of modernity (Charles Taylor)

-   Intimate history of humanity (Theodor Zeldin)

Read books
----------

-   Mindset: The new Psychology of success. By Carol S. Dweck, a book
    expounding the Fixed and Growth mindsets.

-   Talking To Strangers, (Malcolm Gladwell), a discussion on why we are
    so bad at perceiving people we don't know much about.

-   Crucial Conversations, tools for talking when the stakes are high
    (Kerry Patterson, Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler), a
    review on how the authors discovered that one of the major factors
    that makes people succeed in getting things done, both in business
    and elsewhere, was the ability to have crucial conversations.

-   Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (Dr. Sattersfield) - A course on CBT,
    but still good enough that I feel like it requires a summary in
    order to remind myself of its major points

-   The 7 Habits of HIghly Effective People (Stephen R. Covey) - A book
    in which the author names and explains seven habits that are useful
    to apply, resulting in becoming more effective as a person.
    Interesting side note: first three are about the self, last four
    about interacting with others. You have to mold yourself before
    increasing your effectiveness(?) with others.

-   How to Talk to Anyone (Leil Lowndes) - 92 tips and tricks to
    interacting with others, some of which can actually be quite useful
    and fun to apply ;) Side note: will probably list all the tips
    shortly

-   The Wellbeing Quotient - Elements that contribute to my wellbeing

-   Leadership in a Complex World - A course I followed at the TU Delft
    as part of the honours programme; really fun and engaging, so I want
    to document what I learned here.

-   What the most successful people fo before breakfast (Laura
    Vanderkam) - Taught me the importance of a good morning ritual

-   No excuses (Brian Tracy) - Quite a simple book on how you shouldn't
    blame things, just take responsibility or let it go (?)

-   The go-giver - how giving can be way more helpful than just taking -
    When done the right way

-   21 lessons of the 21st Century (Harari) - About the general state of
    the present and the problems we're facing.

-   Homo Sapiens (Harari) - The past of humanity, beautifully given a
    new perspective

-   The Longevity Code (Kris Verburgh) - Basically my first non-fiction
    good book that I read for my pleasure and changed my life

-   Atomic Habits (James Clear) - This is slowly but surely changing my
    life for the better, learning how to approach changing habits.

-   The Subtle Art of not giving a fuck (Mark Manson) - Choose what you
    care about, don't let your environment choose for you.

-   Becoming (Michelle Obama) - First autobiography I've read afaik, and
    it was a great experience, think I'm a fan of hers now.

Books that are complete and summarized
--------------------------------------

Awfully empty to start with

-   Mindsets (Carol S. Dweck)

Summaries
=========

Mindsets (Carol S. Dweck) [\[mindsets\]]{#mindsets label="mindsets"}
--------------------------------------------------------------------

*Maybe a bit cheating but I'll first copy my summary from last week
here:*

In the book Mindsets, we learn about the two different mindsets people
can have in a field: a fixed mindset where nothing can change and one
must prove time and time again that the 'natural ability' was high
enough, and the growth mindset, where everything is capable of growth if
one tries hard enough in the right way. A fixed mindset that can no
longer breeze past an obstacle will fall, and fall hard, with no way to
get back up. Lacking talent cannot be overcome, and ways to avoid
looking like you failed are created, for instance by not putting any
effort in. A growth mindset can also fall, but unlike the former they
can always get back up again, knowing that trying harder or differently
in order to grow the skills necessary in order to be able to overcome
this obstacle in your way and continue on. This allows the grower to
maintain motivation and reach levels that the fixed-mind-setter is only
able to dream of.

Talking to Strangers (Malcolm Gladwell)
---------------------------------------

I did not expect the content I got when I read this book. I expected it
to be about some common fallacies we possess and tips on how to deal
with them, but instead got a rollercoaster ride emotionally about how
some fundamentally human flaws about understanding others contribute to
a lot of despairingly solvable problems in our society. If I were to
give the most powerful one to realise that would be the power of
coupling, how certain actions are linked quite tightly with their
environment and context. The example that Gladwell mentions is one that
will stay with me for a very long time: The suicide of middle-aged women
in England dropped significantly after one of the facourite methods for
it was replaced (the town-gas that had carbon-monoxide inside and would
lead to a 'clean' death by asphyxiation was replaced by modern gas which
does not). Or how 90% of the crime in a city usually centers around 5%
of the streets. Very eery to realise how we can make real life changing
decisions like suicide or crime, because of a particular context.

Gladwell wants us to realise that we are paradoxical in how we handle
Strangers; for we understand/know that we ourselves are hard to read and
understand but expect to exactly that for others. To show this he took
one of a lot of the psychological analyses that are quite vague and
interpretable, like those 'What image do you see in this inksplash', and
made some people do a 'complete the word' experiment where you would get
a partial word and have to complete it, e.g. \_ \_ \_ v e $\rightarrow$
k n i v e. When you ask people if you can draw conclusions about
\*themselves\* they will well you that is no way to say anything about
them, but if you ask them to do the exact same thing with someone else's
results, they will happily draw the most extreme of conclusions. (this
also ties into 'what you see is all there is' from Thinking, Fast and
Slow)

When people perform counterintuitively to what our culture expects, they
are quite quickly ousted or seen as 'strange', like the american student
that got convicted (falsely) for murder because she had a different way
of coping then she was supposed to have.

One more interesting aspect that the book also touched upon is one that
I believe is quite known to many in some ways: Alcohol transforms
people, it doesn't reveal people. It was quite impressive to see that it
actually made you adhere \*more\* to your environmental expectations
instead of rebelling which is more in line with what I would have
intuitively expected.

In conclusion, this book had a lot to tell, and tell it did. While some
of the examples were more gruesome and criminal than others (we
essentially went through a list of criminal cases), the way Gladwell
extracts a message from these cases is quite compelling, though you
should keep in mind that this book is mostly about awareness of our
problems, not a set of solutions that we can always use. As always, the
first step towards improving at something is to become aware of your
current state and where the road forwards is. And in that I believe that
Gladwell did quite well.

Thinking, Fast and Slow (Daniel Kahnemann)
------------------------------------------

This book tells us the story of three pairs of (opposing) entities: That
of System 1 and System 2, Econs and humans, and the experiencing and
remembering selves. System 1 and 2 are personalisations of two kinds of
ways our brain approaches the world, through an intuitive understanding
of the world and speedy decisions (system 1), and a slower, (more)
rational system 2, which monitors system 1 and may take over when it
doesn't 'agree' or is triggered. Econs are completely rational beings
who should be left free to make their own choices, Humans are not and
should be given help when making some decisions (tldr; read nudge for
this part) The experiencing self is the human that experiences each
moment while the remembering self remembers that and is usually more
powerful in making decisions It is a book about behavioural economics
though I found it to be more fitting to decision psychology, as it
pertains to how we make decisions and think about them. The main theme
of the book is how we're not rational (though Kahnemann wants to make
sure we don't interpret that as meaning we're irrational). Personally I
found many of the examples in the book to be quite insightful and they
stimulated me towards reflecting on my own perspectiv on the matters, so
I'll take a few to highlight what I mean;

-   When we get a question that is harder to answer and would require
    quite some thinking our intuitive system (system 1) will usually
    answer a simpler question and propose its solution instead. Think
    for instance if you are asked whether you are happy with your life
    it should take quite a while to collect all the factors which can
    influence that, but we can also just fill in whether we are happy
    right now.

-   Extreme cases are more likely to occur when you're looking at small
    numbers

-   Would it be more painful an experience to add onto a torture with
    the same peak pain an additional 10 minutes of a bit lesser pain?
    No, it would actually reduce the amount of pain someone remembers
    (remembering selves have no concept of time)

-   The way we frame two treatments will have influence on which
    solution will be chosen which has a paradoxical effect.

-   If you add 10 slightly worse years to someone's life they'll think
    the entire life's worse than without those years, because the end
    matters so much.

### Concepts named

As this book is meant to be about learning the concepts and being able
to use them, I would be remiss if I did not list them all out to
increase the ability of myself to recall them :)

-   When we compare things any numbers that are given are used as a
    relative setpoint. e.g. If we see a house on sale for 2 millions
    we'll go lower from there not get an entire different start bid like
    2 tons.

-   Basically the gambler's fallacy, we shouldn't consider what we have
    already spent when making a choice, just the current state of
    things.

-   All things considered, losses weigh more than gains both in the
    amount of emotion they cause and the amount of regret they spark. As
    such we tend to avoid sure losses and take gambles, while the
    opposite is the case for gains.

-   Luck/chance has a larger role in life than we'd usually like to
    imagine, which ends up to mean that if something goes well
    occasionally, that it will also go bad occasionally.

-   Framing a question one way or another can influence how it is
    perceived (as a positive or negative outcome, good or bad solution)

-   When asked how frequently something occurs, you'll think it occurs
    more frequently if it comes to mind more easily (think terrorist
    attacks)

-   We tend towards less cognitive load (stress on the brain). If
    something takes a lot of brain power, we'll want to avoid it more.

-   We tend to look for info that reinforces our own beliefs instead of
    adapting your beliefs to other facts which we tend to overlook.

-   No more need be said here

-   Answer a harder question with an easier one (sometimes without
    knowing)

-   Humans don't want statistics, they want a sappy story.

-   Kinda seeing things as black and white. Your first impression
    colours the story you draw of someone.

-   Your surroundings effect you more than you'd want to admit. A lot of
    posters of the great leader will tend to make you more loyal, sad to
    say.

-   If you add more detail to a situation you make it seem more likely
    while you actually reduce the probability (subsets!)

#### More info?

Could always re-read the book, and I found that the following medium
article was quite clear: [Every Chapter of Thinking Fast, and Slow in 7
Minutes](https://medium.com/swlh/every-chapter-of-thinking-fast-and-slow-in-7-minutes-5e6adf89cf39)

![The systems of the mind (useful
overview)](summaries/thinking-fast-and-slow-systems.png)

De meeste mensen deugen (Rutger Bregman)
----------------------------------------

I'm going to be honest here, I never expected to be putting a Dutch book
on this list. Not because I can't read Dutch (I have a good grasp of the
intricacies of the Dutch language as a native), but because I had grown
to hate Dutch literature in all of its forms over the years in high
school where I was forced to read and analyze literature that I
intensely disliked, which took away my interest. \"Is this the best that
Dutch literature can offer me,\" is the thought that recurred time and
again. My prime example, by virtue of its still-living memory, is not a
particularly horrific one but a work that started off great. 'Het Leven
in een dag' is a novel that describes how life could look like if we
were to live in a world that where lifespans where compressed to a
single day, and everything was about 'firsts,' from the first time you
saw the sun rise to the first time you had sex. Firsts were also lasts
however, and most things could never happen again (we conveniently
exclude things like breathing and thinking). In this world, heaven is a
single moment where 'everything' happens, and hell is the endless
repetition (or 'Earth' for those less religiously inclined) The concept
is quite interesting and sets one to thinking about how the repetition
of events makes them lose a lot of their magic. The plot of the story
was that of a typical romance with an interesting plan: Have more sex by
going to hell. In our world the reverse is usually preached, but I like
this version more to be completely honest. The plan to go to hell by
murdering someone and getting executed succeeds and our main character
finds himself on Earth and looks around for his girl.

Then, to completely gore the entire thought process that the first
two-thirds of the book stimulate one too, the main character is
recruited by the man he killed to become, of all things, a prostitute.
The following few scenes are just raunchy depictions of the things he is
all but forced to participate in, my 'favourite' being where he has an
orgy while skydiving, laid out in explicit detail.

I realise that I have in the process of wanting to rant about it written
an entire review, so I'll now start talking about the book that (after a
lot of stimulation from my dad and it being suggested by a lady I met
while traveling) I reluctantly started listening to and now am
determined to finish to the end, though I sometimes have to bite through
some reluctance.

The book starts off discussing how humanity is perceived, from a
philosophical perspective. The age-old question that Bregman wishes to
touch upon once again (and hopefully answer) is whether civilization -
rules, order, and leadership - is a boon to humanity, a requirement for
proper treatment of others, or a poison that has only eroded the basic
human decency that is inherent to all of us.

Bregman wants to approach this topic, which is prone to being quite
subjective, as scientifically as possible. I believe he did a remarkable
job, though the book **is** named after his opinion, which is that
humans are inherently decent. He starts by analyzing our behaviour
without civilization, through pre-historical findings, current tribes,
and stories where civilization got a 'fresh start' - a la The Lord of
the Flies - then continues onto social psychological conclusions that
are widely known but deeply controversial, to finish with how things
should change if the worldview that most people are decent would be
implemented, and what would be the effect. In the conclusion he briefly
describes 10 lessons he's learned over his research.

In his efforts to sound rational and scientific he has done quite well,
though some parts of the book leave me wondering whether he sufficiently
defuses the arguments against human cruelty being non-inherent. One
thing that I feel he skirts about unwilling to actually dive into is the
belief that civilization is responsible for all that is cruel. He
repeatedly paints the civilized world as the 'evil' guy, with its
colonization and slavery practices, through the comparisons feel more
like comparing apples to oranges. I would've enjoyed it if he'd
mentioned more cases where one civilization compared to another. Are
leaders always the people with the most hate for eachother? How does
this work in rebellions? How should we look at people that commit not
violent crime but horrible deeds like paedophilia? These are just some
of the questions that the book neglected to touch upon in what felt like
an effort to not get into the intricate debates surrounding those
topics.

To conclude my review, this book has made a significant impact on how I
perceive the world in terms of how people are, baring some of the
resolutions that I felt are intuitive, and with that allowing me to
become more resolved in their veracity. On the other hand, it is like an
opening move at a debate, where the response and the ensuing persuasive
efforts still have to follow. And I am looking forward to see the
arguments from both sides.

Loserthink (Scott Adams)
------------------------

Never thought I'd be reading a book that puts Trump in a mostly positive
light and not feel like the author doesn't know anything. Scott Adams
made for a very interesting read about his concept of losethink.
Loserthink being basically anything that doesn't help you, society, or
your current conversation in any meaningful way.

### Summary of learning points

Adams' approach was to go through the 'minds' of particular professions
who each have particular methods for perceiving the world and seeing
what we can learn from them.

-   Psychologist:

-   Scientist

-   Exonomist

-   Historian

-   Artist

-   Leader: compare your plan to the next best one

Followed by a chapter of persuasion items that do not contribute (things
done by political pundits that you shouldn't)

Moonwalking with Einstein (todo author)
---------------------------------------

Range: Why Generalists thrive in a Specialized World (David Epstein)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This was one of those nice reads that makes everything it says stand out
as well-founded. The main point that the author tries to make is that
you should not specialize (early), as it can be just overvuew that you
gain by keeping a broader perspective that allows you to succeed. He
illustrates this with several topics: Sports, Art, Music, Study
(choice), and (academic) research. The 'antagonist' is presented in the
introduction: the 'kind' world of Tiger Woods, who succeeded because he
specialized early. Epstein argues that this is the exception rather than
the rule, and there are many more stories of athletes with 'range': They
initially explore a braoad range of sports and only after some time
(quite late by some measures), fo they delve into one and invest. Some
other quick main points:

-   Start broad, specialize late $\rightarrow$ T-shaped learning

-   Use analogical thinking (like Kepler)

-   Communication is key (an example of the shuttle crash from NASA is
    given), and don't become too quantative.

-   Plan for short-term not long term (example of a famous female CEO is
    given, who got where she is by constantly planning short-term)

    -   I'm not too sure how to think of this, as it kinda also
        invalidates everything about following your dreams.

-   Do what you feel passion for now, no when to change. Doesn't mean
    giving up on having a bad day.

-   Creativity can be found in applying old things to new problems, or
    new things to old problems,

-   Learn to estimate (like someone from the Manhattan project)

-   We live in a wicked world, not a kind one (reference to Kahnemann)

-   We're getting better at abstract thinking, learn more about
    Reasoning and Logic.

One thought that I got left with is what this entire story implies for
the role of guidance. If you must let everyone explore as much as they
want, can you still guide your e.g. children in some way?

A short History of Nearly Everything, Bill Bryson
-------------------------------------------------

This is Bryson's attempt to explore the natural sciences from their
roots to their current state, mostly through the people that have
advanced it throughout the past few centuries. I was expecting a
different kind of book when I first received it, with a cover indicative
of engineering and design. Expectant of a descriptive explanation of how
everything in the world works, I instead opened it to find an entirely
different perspective on the sciences. While diving through astronomy,
physics, tectonics, and biology, Bryson manages to author a compelling
scene of how surprising the world of science has been over the years.

I can, with confidence, say that my admiration of many well-known
scientists like Newton and Einstein has dimmed and been made more
realistic, while my admiration for the adaptability and robustness of
the scientific community as a whole has increased, however much they may
prove stubborn in many perspectives, the consensus of science has
formed, been shaken, broken, and been turned upside down, and then
proceeds to be formed once again, now from a different perspective. It
reminds me of the adage that science advances 'one funeral at a time' (I
believe that was a quantum physicist who first said it), which while
rude and discounting of adaptability still implies that science does not
regress, and throughout this book I have not seen a solid countexample
to this (though repression of solid ideas until the favoured theorem is
toppled is an ongoing theme). What also impresses me is the amount of
time and effort that scientists can dedicate to studying their
specialization, as put into perspective by Bryson. While I am a
scientist myself (currently doing a MSc.), I simply cannot muster the
dedication required to one-sidedly study something like worms for the
entirety of one's career. Overall the storytelling style of the book is
keenly aware of the extraordinariness of whatever the author comes
across which highlights these happenings once again.

Overall, an amazing book that can really tell a story of how most of the
natural sciences came to be.

On a different note, this book focuses entirely on the western world and
its influence, completely putting aside the rest of the world, which is
quite unfortunate and calls for a book that also takes into account
those contributions. I rationalize this negligence with Bryson's focus
on recent events within a specific subset of the sciences that he found
most interesting, though I find it regrettable.

The Origin of Wealth, Eric D. Beinhocker
----------------------------------------

I received this book from my father for my 15th birthday because he
'could not read the small letters'. Now, 6 years later, I can consider
myself part of a set of readers extraordinary in their due diligence and
dedication for having finished this book. While written as a popular
introduction on the book, this 500-page literary work engulves one in
stats surrounding economic theory, both the incumbent current champion
of the day, 'Traditional Market Theory', as has been developed from Adam
Smith onwards, and a 'new' theory of complexity economics that finds its
basis in the concept of evolution instead of assumptions on rationality.

Algorithms to Live by (Brian Christian and Tom Griffiths)
---------------------------------------------------------

Very interesting fresh perpective from computer science on other aspects
of life, from sorting to choosing a girl.

Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art (James Nestor)
----------------------------------------------------

Great first parts, latter part became a bit too much pseudo-sciencey for
my liking.

Guns, Germs, and Steel: The fates of Human Societies (Jared Diamond)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A really different look on history, dissecting history, geology, and
biology in order to find out why it is not the Native Americans but the
Europeans that colonised the world.

While his conclusions answer many questions they also ask us many other
ones anew.

In essence Jared says that it is mostly the ability to spread
geographically that determines speed of growth, along with basic
advantages such as tamable creatures, not (lack of) intelligence among
other peoples, something I can definitely agree with.

U Thrive: How to Succeed in College (and Life) (Dan Lerner, Alan Daniel Schlechter)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While a bit too assertive to my taste, I listened to this book and found
it containing a lot of the insights that I had collected over the years
of reading self-development books as well as some new ones which I
enjoyed very much. Good starter for anyone, though you should always
take things with a grain of salt.
