Talking to Strangers (Malcolm Gladwell)
---------------------------------------

I did not expect the content I got when I read this book. I expected it
to be about some common fallacies we possess and tips on how to deal
with them, but instead got a rollercoaster ride emotionally about how
some fundamentally human flaws about understanding others contribute to
a lot of despairingly solvable problems in our society. If I were to
give the most powerful one to realise that would be the power of
coupling, how certain actions are linked quite tightly with their
environment and context. The example that Gladwell mentions is one that
will stay with me for a very long time: The suicide of middle-aged women
in England dropped significantly after one of the facourite methods for
it was replaced (the town-gas that had carbon-monoxide inside and would
lead to a 'clean' death by asphyxiation was replaced by modern gas which
does not). Or how 90% of the crime in a city usually centers around 5%
of the streets. Very eery to realise how we can make real life changing
decisions like suicide or crime, because of a particular context.

Gladwell wants us to realise that we are paradoxical in how we handle
Strangers; for we understand/know that we ourselves are hard to read and
understand but expect to exactly that for others. To show this he took
one of a lot of the psychological analyses that are quite vague and
interpretable, like those 'What image do you see in this inksplash', and
made some people do a 'complete the word' experiment where you would get
a partial word and have to complete it, e.g. \_ \_ \_ v e $\rightarrow$
k n i v e. When you ask people if you can draw conclusions about
\*themselves\* they will well you that is no way to say anything about
them, but if you ask them to do the exact same thing with someone else's
results, they will happily draw the most extreme of conclusions. (this
also ties into 'what you see is all there is' from Thinking, Fast and
Slow)

When people perform counterintuitively to what our culture expects, they
are quite quickly ousted or seen as 'strange', like the american student
that got convicted (falsely) for murder because she had a different way
of coping then she was supposed to have.

One more interesting aspect that the book also touched upon is one that
I believe is quite known to many in some ways: Alcohol transforms
people, it doesn't reveal people. It was quite impressive to see that it
actually made you adhere \*more\* to your environmental expectations
instead of rebelling which is more in line with what I would have
intuitively expected.

In conclusion, this book had a lot to tell, and tell it did. While some
of the examples were more gruesome and criminal than others (we
essentially went through a list of criminal cases), the way Gladwell
extracts a message from these cases is quite compelling, though you
should keep in mind that this book is mostly about awareness of our
problems, not a set of solutions that we can always use. As always, the
first step towards improving at something is to become aware of your
current state and where the road forwards is. And in that I believe that
Gladwell did quite well.
